# Introduction

Gregory of Nazianzus (ca. 330–390 CE) is one of the most fascinating figures of a period replete with religious, political, and cultural transformation. A prolific orator, preacher, and poet, Gregory depicted himself as rather more suited for a life of ascetic withdrawal and intellectual contemplation. His life was nevertheless full of excitement. He tells us of several vivid religious experiences; the Cappadocian endured earthquakes, shipwreck, and mob violence. During his storied triennium in Constantinople, he endured stoning twice and was the subject of an assassination plot. Even during periods of ascetic withdrawal Gregory was engaged in the ecclesiastical and theological debates that roiled the second half of the fourth century— few of this period wielded the polemicist’s pen with more deft and verve.

Gregory bequeathed to posterity 44 orations, 249 letters, and around 17,000 lines of poetry. In addition to Gregory’s work, we have the letters and other treatises of his fellow Cappadocian bishops and theologians Basil of Caesarea and Gregory of Nyssa. Thanks to this vast corpus, Gregory is one of the most well-documented historical figures of antiquity. It is customary, and rightly so, to lament the neglect of Gregory’s poetry in modern scholarship, especially in the anglophone world. Gregory’s verse, after all, is probably the earliest large corpus of Christian poetry written in classical meters still extant.[^1] And yet, we still have no complete critical edition of the entire poetic *corpus*. For many poems, the edition of reference remains the Maurist edition done by Caillau and reprinted in *PG* 37–38.[^2] Italian is the only modern language to receive a complete translation of the poems; most poems remain uncommented upon. It is not surprising to see why this would so. Gregory’s verse requires that the reader be equally familiar with classical Greek literature and the literary traditions of early Christianity, most especially the Bible. Many scholars of early Christianity do not have the classical background needed to appreciate Gregory’s tightly wrought, allusive and elusive verse. Most classicists, those best equipped to appreciate Gregory’s literary craft, are either not interested in reading poetry written so late or do not longer have the requisite familiarity with the Christian scriptures and theological traditions. The situation is slowly improving. More and more poems are receiving critical editions and commentaries, though generally in the form of master’s or doctoral theses.[^3] As Late Antiquity attracts more scholarly attention, Gregory’s poems have begun to receive more analyses from a variety of perspectives: literary, philological, historical, and theological. Most scholars coming to Gregory’s verse are generally pre-disposed to see him, if not sympathetically, then at least as a careful and sensitive wordsmith. Gregory’s varied and carefully-wrought corpus is finally receiving the attention it deserves.

Nevertheless, much remains to be done. Literary syntheses in particular are lacking. The work of Kristoffel Demoen remains the only published monograph in English that takes the whole poetic corpus as its object of study; he nevertheless has limited the scope of his analysis to Gregory’s use of pagan and Christian *exempla*.[^4] In his unpublished dissertation, Preston Edwards[^5] ably treats the modern reception of Gregory since the Renaissance and makes a solid case that Gregory participated in the sorts of allusive practices of the Alexandrian poets. Yet he was only able to analyze in depth 24 lines from Gregory’s poetry. Suzanne Abrams Rebillard’s[^6] unpublished dissertation ably elucidates a number of important themes from Gregory’s autobiographical poetry: she draws our attention most especially to the central role of priestly speech in Gregory’s depictions of himself. Yet constraints of time and space restricted the scope of her work to the poems contained in section 2.1 of Caillau’s edition, the so-called “Autobiographical Poems.” Most other treatments of Gregory’s verse have come in the introductions to editions or commentaries and have though exceedingly helpful are necessarily limited by space. Consider, for instance, Simelidis’ illuminating remarks on Gregory and Hellenistic poetry[^7] and and Thomas Kuhn-Treichel’s[^8] perspicacious analysis of Gregory’s figurative speech.

I have conceived of the present work as a general treatment of Gregory’s poetics. Though I naturally read Gregory’s work in his historical and theological context, I have consciously privileged literary questions. I have proceeded by making Gregory’s reception and adaption of Callimachus of Alexandria (c. 290–230 BC) the focal point for the study. This will at first seem an odd choice: why single out one strand, however influential, among the tapestry of Gregory’s reading for such privileged examination? Why not consider Homeric influence, or Euripidean? Certainly the danger of this sort of study is the temptation to find Callimachus everywhere. Though Gregory’s diction derives more to Homer and Euripides than to Callimachus, as is probably inevitable for one writing hexametric, elegiac, and iambic poetry, there is one significant area in which Callimachus is the decisive influence. Callimachus is a uniquely illuminating influence for charting how subsequent poets, in both Greek and Latin, constructed their authorial *personae* and delineated their aesthetic principles. He was the first poet in the western tradition to annunciate explicitly an aesthetic and he came to typify for subsequent poets this approach to poetry that privileged finely-wrought, compressed, and erudite compositions. Scholars working on Latin poetry have recognized this for some time; for poets like Catullus, Virgil, and Ovid, Callimachus was the indispensable archetype of the technically skilled and erudite poet.[^9] Callimachus was no less influential on subsequent Greek poets than their Latin counterparts, but the Greek verse of the Imperial and Late Antique period has only within the past few decades begun to receive sustained literary analysis. For Gregory, I argue, the Alexandrian’s works are thus more than simply one more source to exploit for nice turns of phrase; rather, Callimachus pervasively shapes Gregory’s entire approach to poetic composition. This is seen not only in Gregory’s allusions to Callimachus, which are common and occur quite frequently in programmatic contexts,[^10] but also in several striking formal features in Gregory’s work that have their best precedent in Callimachus’ *oeuvre*. Gregory’s preference for shorter works composed in a striking array of metrical schemes and genres should be seen as an imitation and emulation of Callimachus’ famed generic variety (*polyeideia*), which the Alexandrian defended most famously in *Iamb.* 13. Like Callimachus, Gregory gave special prominence to his poetic *persona*; both poets primarily worked in genres like elegy, didactic epic, or iambic that admitted a strong persona, and eschewed genres like narrative epic in which the *persona* of the poet withdraws to the background. Gregory is by no means a slavish follower of Callimachus. The Cappadocian exploits numerous opportunities to allude irreverently to his poetic model;[^11] moreover, it seems that Gregory regards certain features of his style, especially his cultivation of didactic elements like gnomes and proverbs, as deliberate departures from Callimachus. And yet even these departures from Callimachean precedent are often motivated by Gregory’s (quite Callimachean) desire to tread the untrod path, to baptize pagan Greek poetry for Christian themes.

In the remainder of the introduction, I sketch the outline of Gregory’s life before turning a brief survey of literary approaches to Gregory’s poetry. I then review briefly the scholarly literature on Gregory’s relationship to Callimachus and the authenticity of a few disputed poems. In chapter one, I set the stage for Gregory’s Callimacheanism by surveying the reception of Callimachus in the second and third centuries AD. Callimachus’ popularity is well-attested in the papyrological record, but the Alexandrian poet was cited almost exclusively by poets; rhetoricians confined themselves to earlier poets like Homer, Euripides, and Menander. I argue that Callimachus came to typify a specifically poetic eloquence. By examining the three most extensive works of hexametric didactic from this period (Dionysius’ *Periegesis*, Oppian’s *Halieutica*, and ps.-Oppian’s *Cynegetica*), I contend that Callimachus is a uniquely useful influence for probing how later poets create their poetic *personae* and annunciate their own aesthetic. I have organized chapters two through five around four traits that scholars have consistently associated with Callimachean poetry: originality, fineness (λεπτότης), erudition, self-awareness.[^12] In chapter two, we see how Gregory explicitly adopts the untrodden path motif the prologue to Callimachus’ *Aetia*. I then consider how Gregory innovates in small and large ways within the highly traditional genre of Greek epigram before analyzing a poem that is generically much more innovative, the 630+ line hexametric *De rebus suis* (2.1.1). I contend that Gregory’s formal experimentation should be not regarded as fundamental insensitivity to form, as Keydell maintained,[^13] but as a deliberate embrace of Callimachean *polyeideia*. Chapter three has as its subject Gregory’s poetic style. I show that for Gregory, Callimachus typifies the concise and technically capable poet, for the Cappadocian consistently advocates for concise speech in precisely Callimachean terms. Though there are prosodic irregularities (or false quantities) in Gregory’s poetry, technical analysis of his metrical practice shows that he is otherwise a careful poet sensitive to rhythm and diction. Moreover, he adopts certain stylistic features that though present in other poets, were especially prominent in Callimachus, like anaphora, juxtaposed prosodic variants, and anastrophe. I then show that Gregory considered his cultivation of didactic features like *gnōmai* and proverbs to be the signature element of his style. This allows me to put forward a novel interpretation of a difficult passage in Gregory’s *In suos versus* (2.1.39), where I argue that Gregory draws attention to the style, not merely the contents, of his poetry. In the fourth chapter, I attend to Gregory’s erudition. We see that Gregory’s self-proclaimed master of pagan and Christian literature as a key aspect of his poetic persona. Like Callimachus and other Hellenistic poets, Gregory attended carefully not only to prior poetry, but also to prior prose, especially philosophical literature. Though the patent didactic intent in some of Gregory’s verse is at odd with Callimachus’ practice, when Gregory deploys erudition for polemical and cultural ends he fits neatly within the tradition of Alexandrian didactic. In chapter five, I consider Gregory’s poetic self-awareness. Though scholars have generally been disinclined to see any larger ordering in Gregory’s poetic *oeuvre*, I argue that, following Callimachean precedent, Gregory created sequences of multiple poems thematically linked by ring-compositions and self-allusions. I make my case through careful attention to internal cross-references in seven elegiac poems (2.1.10, 15, 16, 45, 34a/b, and 38) and to the references within these poems to other parts of Gregory’s poetic *corpus*. I conclude that Gregory edited his poems much more extensively than has previously been recognized, even if he never succeeded in fully editing his poetry into an aesthetically unified *Gesamtwerk*. 

Though I have not endeavored to edit the poems treated that lack a critical edition, I have not infrequently made emendations to the transmitted text or suggested a minority reading. These I have collected in an appendix. I have made the unusual choice of rendering citations from Gregory’s verse of more than two lines into English verse. I have rendered Greek hexameter and elegiac couplets[^14] into iambic pentameter, since Milton’s *Paradise Lost* is the primary English epic. For Greek iambic trimeter,  I likewise use iambic pentameter, since Shakespeare is the most important English dramatist and iambic trimeter was the primary meter of dialogue in Greek Tragedy and Comedy. However, when rendering hexameter and elegiac couplets into English I employ more archaic diction (chiefly the now defunct second person thou), which I eschew when rendering iambic trimeter. This captures in part the greater conversational feel of iambic trimeter in Greek, while admitting archaic forms captures roughly the vast gulf between the diction typical of Greek hexametric poetry in any age and the contemporary speech. I have generally not accorded other poets the (perhaps dubious) honor of translating them into verse, since poetic translations of most other poets cited exist in abundance. But for Gregory, almost no metrical translations in English exist, and I think it vital that those without the requisite Greek be able to experience him as a poet rather than through prosaic renderings which, though perhaps precise, do no justice to Gregory’s literary artistry. I depart from this practice only in my renderings of *carm.* 2.1.39, where Gregory is especially elusive and hard to parse: here I opt for the clarity of prose. 

## Gregory’s Life

I am not an historian nor the son of one; a brief sketch, however, of Gregory’s biography will be useful for those not familiar with our poet’s tumultuous life. For more detail, I refer the reader to a number of excellent historical studies of Gregory’s life, particularly the magisterial studies of John McGuckin and Susannah Elm.[^15] Gregory was born sometime around 330 in Nazianzus, a small town in the Roman province of Cappadocia.  This places his birth in the immediate aftermath of Constantine’s consolidation of control over the entire Roman empire. Gregory’s mother, Nonna, came from a family that had been Christians for several generations. His father, Gregory the Elder, initially belonged to sect called the “hypsistarians” (worshipers of God the most high). The exact nature of their beliefs and practices is unclear; our Gregory characterizes the sect as a mixture of pagan and Jewish elements. Gregory’s father probably converted sometime in Gregory’s early childhood and became bishop of Nazianzus (celibacy was not yet normative for clergy). Gregory had an older sister, Gorgonion, and a younger brother, Caesarius. Our poet depicts his birth as a dramatic affair; he tells us that his mother, after bearing a daughter, yearned deeply for a son and vowed to consecrate him to divine service. She received some sort of confirmation in a dream, after which she became pregnant with Gregory.[^16]

Cappadocia II had become by the fourth century a perhaps surprising context in which literary culture flourished. The region benefitted from Constantine’s new foundation at Constantinople. The region nourished not only Gregory’s fellow Cappadocian fathers, Basil the Great and Gregory of Nyssa, but also the ascetic theologian Evagrius (a disciple of Gregory’s) and a number of other lesser lights, like Gregory’s kinsmen Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium. The literary activity of these men make Cappadocia in the fourth century one of the most well-documented periods and places of the ancient world.[^17] Gregory’s education began in Cappadocia; some indication of the literary culture may be found in Gregory’s epitaphic sequence of epigrams for his cousin Euphemius (*AnthPal*  8.122–130). This son of a Cappadocian teacher of rhetoric (Amphilochius), the young man died just before his wedding, but not before composing verses in both Greek and Latin (*AnthPal* 8.122–23). After initial instruction in Cappadocian Caesarea, Gregory and his brother Caesarius studied in Caesarea Maritima in Palestine before moving onto Alexandria. Caesarius studied medicine there for some time, but Gregory moved on after about a year to Athens, where he spent most of his twenties studying rhetoric and literature in the company of his friend and fellow Cappadocian Basil. 

Around the age of thirty, Gregory returned home from Athens. There is some indication he worked initially as a professional rhetorician,[^18] but soon embarked on a program of ascetic experimentation with Basil. In the early 361 or 362 he was, against his will, ordained a priest by his father. In 370, Gregory’s friend Basil got himself elected arch-bishop of Cappadocian Caesarea. This sudden reentrance of Basil into public life seems to have surprised and offended Gregory and put a great strain on their friendship. Gregory supported Basil’s bid, but with far less exuberance than Basil anticipated. In 372, Basil convinced Gregory to allow himself to be consecrated bishop of the contested backwater town of Sasima. Cappadocia had been split into two provinces and Anthemius, the metropolitan bishop of the new province, was asserting his jurisdiction over the town.[^19] It was a sorry affair: after the episcopal consecration the mob more or less ran Basil and Gregory’s entourage out of town. This furthered the rift between the two men; Gregory refused to reassert authority over the see, much to Basil’s annoyance. Instead, Gregory continued to serve alongside his father as an auxiliary bishop. 

After the death of his father in 375, Gregory evidently had no desire to become the titular successor of his father. He entrusted the affairs of the Nazianzene church to a presbyter and went into ascetic withdrawal until 378. During this year, he was called to Constantinople to head a small congregation of Nicene Christians in a city that was predominantly homoian or Arian in its theological orientation. His three years in the capital were without a doubt the most straining and exciting of his life. Gregory led a remarkably successful preaching campaign that elicited much resentment from his theological opponents. Twice he was pelted with stones, and once was nearly assassinated. He also faced intrigue from within his own party. Maximus, a curious mix of Cynic philosopher and Christian ascetic, initially ingratiated himself to Gregory, but later schemed to have himself anointed as arch-bishop. During the council of Constantinople in summer, 381, which bestowed to posterity the revised form of the Nicene creed used in nearly all Christian churches, Gregory initially enjoyed significant influence. It seemed simply a matter of time before he was consecrated as the titular arch-bishop of the capital. After the first president of the council, ???, died, Gregory took over leadership responsibilities. But he was soon outmaneuvered on two fronts. Gregory supported an extremely unpopular solution to the episcopal succession crisis then underway in Antioch. Moreover, Gregory’s whole-hearted and open assertion of the Holy Spirit’s full divinity was seen as politically inconvenient at a period when most felt that Nicene Christians needed to be unified. One faction began to claim that Gregory could not be legally installed as arch-bishop since he was already the bishop of another see. Rather than ride out the criticism, Gregory retired in dramatic fashion to his home in Nazianzus.

Though physically removed from the center of imperial and ecclesiastic politics in the east, Gregory remained well-connected and informed about developments in the capital. Even before returning home he embarked on an ambitious literary program to rehabilitate his reputation both at home and in Constantinople. A flurry of apologetic and polemical poems flew forth.[^20] The following year, Gregory was invited to a council in the capital to address the growing Apollinarian crisis.[^21] In reply, Gregory dispatched a bitter critique of bishops (*carm.* 2.1.13) and a series of theological letters that quickly became received as the Orthodox reply to Apollinarianism. Gregory’s correspondence bears witness to his continued contact with people in the capital during his retirement. Yet ecclesiastical matters were also tense at home. Much to the chagrin of the Nazianzene church and the Cappadocian bishops, Gregory had no interest in asserting episcopal jurisdiction over his father’s see in Nazianzus. Gregory probably was genuinely tired of the demands episcopal leadership placed upon him, but such a move would also have given ammunition to his critics in the capital who claimed that he was already the legitimate bishop of another see. However, in 382 when a rival theological group tried to claim the Nazianzene episcopacy (Gregory calls them Apollinarians), he finally decided to yield to his fellow bishops pleas and reassert control; this he did with the help of the governor Olympius.[^22] Within a year, however, Gregory had orchestrated a successful transfer of the see to a successor, after which he retired from public ministry for good. 

Throughout his retirement, Gregory worked tirelessly to collect and edit his vast literary output. In 384, Gregory sent a collection he sent to his grand-nephew Nicobulus.[^23] This is the basis on the corpus transmitted by the Byzantine manuscripts. Gregory carefully sifted through his orations for publication, and, as I argue in chapter five, much of his poetry as well. Jerome tells us that he died around 389–390.[^24]


## Literary Approaches to Gregory’s Poetry

I do not wish to reproduce Preston Edwards’ excellent survey of modern literary approaches to Gregory’s poetry.[^25] It is necessary, however, to contextualize the present work within the broader scholarly discourse. Edwards has shown that Gregory enjoyed a high reputation among the hellenists of the  sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Gregory’s allusive play with prior literature and literary synthesis of Athens and Jerusalem was decidedly appealing to scholars of the Renaissance like ???, ???, and ???. Though Gregory is seen today primarily as a rhetorician (no less a classicist than Brooks Otis said it was worth learning Greek simply to read Gregory’s *Orations* in their original splendor), it was Gregory’s poetry that first attracted attention in the Renaissance. Selections of his poetry were published before his orations and letters; a number of Renaissance scholars preferred Gregory’s poetry to his prose.[^26] The tide began to turn in the eighteenth: in a generally sympathetic treatment of Gregory’s epigrams Ludovico Muratori felt the need to defend his choice to edit Gregory’s poems. The end of the eighteenth century brought the rise of Romanticism as the dominant paradigm for understanding poetry; this mode of thinking dominated approaches to Gregory’s verse for the next century and a half. This was a mixed bag for Gregory. On the one hand, scholars working within an essentially Romantic paradigm maintained that authentic expression of emotion was the highest end of poetry. Some scholars, especially those working in France and Italy, thus found much to like in Gregory, since so much of autobiographical poetry is marked by highly emotive and intense self-scrutiny.[^27] On the other hand, the Romantic emphasis on original expression of direct experience led many scholars, especially those working in Germany,[^28] to regard allusions and other techniques of “bookish” poetry as aesthetic defects, evidence of a degenerate obsequiousness to the past.[^29] Moreover, scholars posited a fundamental gap between true poetry (the authentic expression of emotion) and rhetoric (speech marred by sophistic techniques).
Wilamowitz’s remarks, if anything sanguine for his period, illustrate well how poetry and rhetoric were understood under this Romantic paradigm: 

> “It was disastrous for Gregory that his period was so divorced from the naive and unknown that they only recognized the artful, stylistic aspects of rhetoric and that the rhetoric which he learned in Athens not only denied in principle the basic distinction between poetry and prose, but even played with it to the extreme.”[^30]

Even the classical Latin poets suffered from this view: Vergil fell out of favor during the course of the nineteenth century and had to be rehabilitated at the beginning of the twentieth. Scholars of this persuasion read Gregory primarily as an instrument to reconstruct earlier, “better” poets.[^31] *Quellenforschung* became a means not for considering Gregory’s creative appropriations of the literary past, but a tool for condemning Gregory’s lack of originality.[^32] Gregory was typically regarded instead as essentially a rhetorician, often a bombastic one of the Asian school, who ought not to have ventured into poetry.[^33] These Romantic views of Gregory found their culmination in the middle of the twentieth century in the work of Pellegrino on the one hand and Bernard Wyss and Roger Keydell on the other. Pellegrino saw in Gregory’s autobiographical poems as authentic expressions of religious experience, but held that his “lyric impulse” was often choked out in the Cappadocian’s other kinds of verse, especially the didactic poetry.[^34] For Keydell, the Cappadocian was essentially a rhetorician with no sense for poetic form attempting to write verse. Moreover, Gregory’s insensitivity to literary form mirrors the even deeper gulf between Gregory’s deep Christian faith and the pagan spirit that animated the poets of the classical past. Thus Keydell sees the chief historical significance of Gregory’s work precisely in this “turning away” from both the form and substance of the hellenic past.[^35] Bernard Wyss was rather more sympathetic than Keydell, but similarly saw a fundamentally irreconcilable gap between the pagan literary past and the new Christian world. For Wyss, Gregory’s attempt to bring pagan antiquity and Christianity into a “living unity”(*lebendige Einheit*) was a noble but ultimately failed task. Gregory was unable to escape the literary conventions of his period, but was “as sensitive to the culture heritage of Greece as was possible for a Christian of his time. For this, he deserves our special affection.” Though each scholar’s synthesis has a different flavor, we see that in each Romantic ideals are taken axiomatically. Because in such a view poetry is essentially an expression of an identity, Gregory’s Christianity takes on outsized importance, whether as a positive, innovating agent (Pellegrino), or as a hindrance in fully grasping the hellenic *Geist* (Wyss and Keydell). For each, moreover, the Romantic binary between poetry and rhetoric obtained: Gregory’s poetic efforts were often marred by rhetorical impulses. 

This hegemony of Romantic notions was challenged during the middle decades of the twentieth century, especially by Pasquali’s rehabilitation of allusion as a legitimate poetic exercise (*l’arte allusiva*),[^36] whence originated a rich and varied theoretical discourse on “intertextuality.”[^37] Though most Classical scholars theorizing about intertextuality were interested in classical Latin poetry, most of the models were easily transferrable to later Greek verse, since the legitimacy and significance of allusion are central issues to both *corpora*. Antonio Salvatore was the first to apply Pasquali’s notions to Gregory’s verse.[^38] Franca Ela Consolino has criticized Salvatore’s analysis for being overly impressionistic;[^39] yet even if Salvatore’s analysis was imperfect, his theoretical reorientation was rightly influential, for he insisted that each allusion be analyzed on its own aesthetic merit, rather than dismissed *a priori* as an imitation.[^40] Though the views of Wyss and Keydell occasionally still find proponents,[^41] for most scholars since the 1960s allusions and other traits of late poetry are aesthetic possibilities rather than evidence of literary decline.


The 1970s, 80s, and 90s witnessed important philological advances in the study of Gregory’s poetry. The students of Bernard Wyss and Martin Sicherl produced a number of critical editions and commentaries of individual poems.[^42] Sicherl and Werhahn produced important analyses of the textual transmission.[^43] Roberto Palla and Manfred Kertsch collaborated on several editions.[^44] The first and only complete translation of Gregory’s poetry into a European vernacular also occurred during this time (Italian).[^45] On the literary front, Nicastri and Consolino have highlighted Gregory’s innovating role in the history of Greek elegy and epigram respectively.[^46] Claudio Moreschini and D.A. Sykes produced reevaluations of Gregory’s verse sensitive both to literary concerns and Gregory’s larger philosophical and religious context.[^47] This is most evident in their edition, commentary, and English translation of the *Poemata arcana* (1.1.1–6, 7–9).[^48] Though primarily theological in orientation, the studies of Brooks Otis, Herbert Musurillo, and Peter Gilbert treated sympathetically the theological aspects and possibilities of Gregory’s verse.[^49]





We have seen in the opening decades of the twenty first century further progress in philological work on Gregory’s poetry. The first volume of Gregory’s autobiographical verse appeared in the Bude series.[^50] Christos Simelidis produced an excellent edition[^51] of four poems from *Gedichtgruppe* 1 and has inherited the task from Martin Sicherl of producing the critical edition of the entire *oeuvre* for *Corpus Christianorum*. A number of Italian scholars have produced editions and commentaries of individual poems, often as doctoral dissertations.[^52] Literary treatments have tended either to focus on how Gregory skillfully manipulated his literary past or considered Gregory among the broader backdrop of cultural and religious transformation in Late Antiquity. In the former camp, Preston Edwards, Thomas Kuhn-Treichel, Simelidis and Juliette Prudhomme each see Gregory as a skillful poet who brings new life to the literary tradition, especially through the introduction of Christian themes.[^53] By contrast, studies like Suzanne Abrams Rebillard’s sensitive treatment of *carm.* 2.1.2 show how numerous the resonances of Gregory’s poetry when considered against contemporary political and religious concerns.[^54] Similarly, Andreas Schwab has rejected an overly narrow classicizing and formalist approach to Gregory’s verse, insisting instead that we read poems like Gregory’s *carm.* 1.1.5 (*De providentia*) as legitimate participants in a broader philosophical and theological discourse,[^55] just as Gianfranco Agosti has consistently emphasized the capacity for Christian poetry like Gregory’s to produce genuine dialogue between competing religious sects.[^56]

Within this broader framework, I now wish to survey briefly scholarly treatments of Gregory’s debts to Callimachus. Scholars in the nineteenth century were typically interested in Gregory precisely because he contained traces of earlier poets like Callimachus. Indeed, the influential scholar of Alexandrian poetry Augustus Ferdinand Naeke recommended the reading of Gregory precisely for this reason.[^57] Wyss judged that Callimachus was the most important linguistic model for Gregory after Homer and Euripides.[^58] Yet the aesthetic potential of such allusions was ignored or discounted. Wyss’s remarks are typical, “The allusions to Callimachus are numerous, but without any sensitivity for the fineness of his models in tone and structure. It is a rather uncomfortable sensation, as though we were being forced to listen to a beloved piece of music on an old and scratchy record player.”[^59] Gregory’s allusions to Callimachus only slowly began to receive closer scrutiny. A. Kambylis’ brief article noted Gregory’s use in *Poem. arc.* 1 of the opening to Callimachus’ *Hymn to Apollo*. He argued, not always persuasively, that Gregory shifted Callimachus’ emphasis on the visual realm to the auditory.[^60] Francesco Tissoni rightly continued to mine Gregory for illumination of Callimachus’ text.[^61] Otherwise, it was not until the beginning of the twenty first century that Gregory’s interaction with the Alexandrian poets began to receive detailed scrutiny. In a penetrating article Adrian Hollis showed that Gregory alluded to so many different parts of the prologue to the *Aetia* in so many different poems that it is fair to surmise he had the opening memorized.[^62] Simelidis showed in his survey of “Gregory and Hellenistic Poetry”[^63] that Gregory sensitively alluded to a wide range of Hellenistic poetry, even genres one might not expect, like pederastic epigram. In her wide-ranging study, Juliette Prudhomme on several occasions profitably juxtaposes Gregory’s refashioning of the literary tradition with the efforts of the Alexandrian poets[^64]; Preston Edwards even dared to treat Gregory *qua* an Alexandrian poet. Though his analysis of individual texts is not always convincing, his fundamental conviction that Gregory exhibits the same allusive practices as those of the Alexandrian poets is correct. 

I set out in my project to make advances in several respects. First, I consider a broader range of Callimachean techniques. Gregory’s allusions have received scrutiny, but other techniques of poetic composition, whether metrics, syntax, or verbal repetitions, have received less attention. Second, I connect Gregory’s Callimacheanism to issues of broader importance like the shaping of his poetic *persona* and the manner in which the Cappadocian poet narrates his aesthetic. As we shall see in chapter one, the basic dichotomy between technically competent “Callimachean” and inspired “Homeric” poets persisted well into the Imperial period and Late Antiquity. This means that it was precisely through appropriations or rejections of Callimachus that poets in these periods narrated their own aesthetic principles. This foregrounding of aesthetic concerns leads me to invoke Gregory’s Christianity as an explanation far less often than many other interpreters. Though the dichotomy between pagan and Christian is elemental to understanding Gregory’s poetic work, scholars have too quickly invoked Gregory’s Christianity to explain novel elements in his work.[^65] Gregory’s sincere Christianity certainly limited his possibilities; yet the tonal and generic variety of Gregory’s poetic *oeuvre* is by no means a straightforward requirement of his Christian faith. There were far more straightforward paths for a Christian poet to follow. He might have written biblical epic, as did Apollinaris and Nonnus; hagiographic verse, as would Eudocia; or even cento.[^66] Instead he composed a highly variegated *corpus* of different tones, registers, genres, and metrical schemes. It is my contention that Callimachean categories are precisely what we need to render these aesthetic decisions intelligible. 















[^1]:	The *Metaphrasis psalmorum* attributed to Apollinaris of Laodicea is usually dated to the fifth-century (see @golegahomerische1960) but in a forthcoming volume Andrew Faulkner argues for a fourth-century date.

[^2]:	@Caillau-patrisnostriGregorii-1842

[^3]:	TODO: fill in examples

[^4]:	@Demoen-Paganbiblicalexempla-1996

[^5]:	@Edwards-epistamenoisagoreysoChristian-2003

[^6]:	@AbramsRebillard-SpeakingsalvationGregory-2003

[^7]:	@Simelidis-SelectedPoemsGregory-2009 30–46

[^8]:	@Kuhn-SchweigenVersenText-2014 41–116

[^9]:	For Callimachus influence in Augustan Latin poetry, the classic study is @wimmelkallimachos1960. More recently, see @Asper-DistinctivereadingsCallimachus-2016 and @Barchiesi-RomanCallimachus-2011.

[^10]:	See chapter 3, section “???” for a discussion of several poignant examples.

[^11]:	See examples in chapter two, section “???” and chapter 4, section “???”.

[^12]:	TODO: 

[^13]:	TODO: insert 

[^14]:	I should like in the future to develop a suitable scheme for rendering elegiac couplets into English verse in a form that distinguishes them from hexameter, but the exigencies of time have at present prevented this effort.

[^15]:	In addition to @McGuckin-SaintGregoryNazianzus-2001 and @Elm-SonsHellenismFathers-2015, the articles of Neil McLynn and Brad Storin are especially helpful in elucidating Gregory’s history. For Gregory’s retirement, see especially @McLynn-VoiceConscienceGregory-1997, @McLynn-Gregorygovernorspaideia-2015,  and @Storin-silentwayasceticism-2011. More generally, see @McLynn-hellenistsGreogrysophists-2006. For a survey of the modern biographies of Gregory and their conceptual limitations, see @Storin-AutohagiobiographyGregoryNazianzus-2017.

[^16]:	Nonna’s vow is described at *carm.* 2.1.45 197–201 and more extensively at *carm.* 2.1.11 68–81.

[^17]:	For historical treatments of fourth century Cappadocia, see @VanDam-BecomingChristianConversion-2003, @Dam-FamiliesFriendsLate-2003, and @vandamkingdom2002.

[^18]:	See McLynn ???.

[^19]:	See @Gallay-GregoireNazianzeLettres-1964 61n1.

[^20]:	Most notably 2.1.11 *De vita sua*, 2.1.12 *De seipso et episcopis*, and 2.1.13 *In episcopos*.

[^21]:	Apollinaris and his followers asserted that divine aspect of Jesus’ nature, the λόγος θεοῦ, effectively erased Jesus’ human mind. 

[^22]:	See @McLynn-Gregorygovernorspaideia-2015.

[^23]:	See Storin ???.

[^24]:	Jerome tells us at the end of *De viris illustribus* that he wrote the work in the fourteenth year of Theodosius (392–93 AD). He places Gregory’s death three years earlier.

[^25]:	@Edwards-epistamenoisagoreysoChristian-2003 1–49.

[^26]:	For example, ???.

[^27]:	In this camp belong ???, ???, ???, and @Pellegrino-poesiadiGregorio-1932.

[^28]:	The divide between French and German valuations of Gregory was noted already by @Ackermann-didaktischePoesieGregorius-1903 ??? at the beginning of the twentieth century.

[^29]:	@Eliot-TraditionIndividualTalent-1920 sagely analyzes the limitations of this Romantic conception of poetry which was still tacitly supreme in period between the great wars.

[^30]:	“*Da ward ihm verhängnisvoll, daß seine Zeit, dem Naiven und Unbewußten ganz entfremdet, nur die künstliche Stilisierung der Rhetorik anerkannte, und daß die Rhetorik, die er in Athen gelernt hatte, nicht nur den Unterschied zwischen Poesie und Prosa prinzipiell negierte, sondern auch eigentlich nur Fortissimo zu spielen wußte.*” @Wilamowitz-Moellendorff-griechischeLiteraturAltertums-1912 293

[^31]:	@Wilamowitz-Moellendorff-griechischeLiteraturAltertums-1912 294 found Gregory especially interesting because he was useful for reconstructing earlier, lost poetry.

[^32]:	Even a fairly sympathetic critic like Bernard Wyss wrote that Gregory, lacked the skill to escape the ossified poetic conventions of the fourth century: “*Aber es fehlte ihm [sc. Gregor] die schöpferische Kraft, die Konvention zu sprengen, in der die griechische Poesie erstarrt war*“ @Wyss-GregorNazianzgriechischchristlicher-1949 203.

[^33]:	See especially @SchisselvonFleschenberg-ReviewMichelePellegrino-1935, a scathing and unjust review of @Pellegrino-poesiadiGregorio-1932.

[^34]:	@Pellegrino-poesiadiGregorio-1932 19

[^35]:	“*So erscheinen die Gedichte Gregors als ein Seitenschössling am Baum der griechischen Literaturgeschichte, entsprossen aus den Wurzeln einer Persönlichkeit, in der die griechische Bildung durch innerlichtstes Christentum wieder aufgehoben wurde. Zwiespalt der Form in den einen, Zwiespalt des Inneren als Gegenstand der anderen— beides bedeutet eine Loslösung vom Antiken. Dass sie uns diese Abkehr, die ganz unfreiwillig ist, erzwungen durch die Verchristlichung des Geistes--- das ist, über das Literarhistorische hinaus, die allgemeine geistesgeschichtliche Bedeutung der Gedichte Gregors*” @Keydell-literarhistorischeStellungGedichte-1953 142–43.

[^36]:	@pasqualiarte1942. For the reception of Pasquali, see @citroniarte2011.

[^37]:	For examples of particularly influential studies on intertextuality, see @Conte-rhetoricimitationGenre-1986 (revisited in @Conte-imitazionefurtooriginalita-2014), 
	 @C.B-Imitazionearteallusiva-1989, and @Hinds-Allusionintertextdynamics-1998.  

[^38]:	@Salvatore-Tradizioneoriginalitanegli-1960

[^39]:	@Consolino-Sofiisamfoterisprytanin-1987 409

[^40]:	@Salvatore-Tradizioneoriginalitanegli-1960 41

[^41]:	*e.g.* @Hose-PoesieausSchule-2004

[^42]:	See @knechtgregor1972, @Jungck-GregorNazianzvita-1974, @beuckmanngregor1988, @Meier-GregorNazianzUeber-1989, @Oberhaus-GregorNazianzGegen-1991, @Sundermann-GregorNazianzRangstreit-1991, @Z.Z-GregorNazianzMahnungen-1996, and @domitergregor1999.

[^43]:	See @Hollger-handschriftlicheUberlieferungGedichte-1985, @G.S-handschriftlicheuberlieferungGedichte-1986, and more recently @Sicherl-handschriftlicheUberlieferungGedichte-2011.

[^44]:	@pallagregor1985 @crimigregorio1995

[^45]:	See @moreschinigregorio1994 @C.C-GregorioNazianzenoPoesie-1999.

[^46]:	See @Nicastri-Ricerchesullelegia-1981 and @Consolino-Sofiisamfoterisprytanin-1987.

[^47]:	See @Sykes-ReflectionsGregoryNazianzen-1989 @Sykes-GregoryNazianzendidactic-1985 @Sykes-GregoryNazianzenpoet-1989 @Sykes-PoemataArcanaGregory-1979, @Moreschini-PoesiaculturaGregorio-1988 @Moreschini-Poesiateologianei-1997.

[^48]:	 @Moreschini-PoemataArcana-1997.

[^49]:	See @Otis-thronemountainessay-1961 @Musurillo-poetryGregoryNazianzus-1970, @Gilbert-ProblemSelfKnowledgePoetry-1994, and  @Gilbert-Godmantheological-2001.

[^50]:	@B.T-GregoireNazianzeOeuvres-2004

[^51]:	@Simelidis-SelectedPoemsGregory-2009

[^52]:	For example, @Moroni-Nicobulojrpadre-2006, @Ricceri-GregorioNazianzenocarm-2013 @DeBlasi-GregoriodiNazianzo-2018.

[^53]:	@Edwards-epistamenoisagoreysoChristian-2003, @Kuhn-SchweigenVersenText-2014 @Simelidis-SelectedPoemsGregory-2009, and @Prudhomme-oeuvrepoetiqueGregoire-2006

[^54]:	@AbramsRebillard-speechactswearing-2013

[^55]:	@Schwab-UberVorsehungPeri-2009 130

[^56]:	See especially @Agosti-Cristianizzazionepoesiagreca-2009.

[^57]:	@naekeopuscula1842 237, *cit.* @Edwards-epistamenoisagoreysoChristian-2003 9.

[^58]:	@Wyss-GregorNazianzgriechischchristlicher-1949 192

[^59]:	“* Die Nachahmungen [von Kallimachos] sind zahlreich, aber ohne Gefühl für die Feinheiten der Vorlage in Tonart und Versbau: Es ist uns etwa zumute, als müßten wir ein uns vertrautes schönes Musikstück auf einer abgenützten, kratzigen Schallplatte anhören.*” @Wyss-GregorNazianzgriechischchristlicher-1949

[^60]:	@kambylisgregor1982

[^61]:	For example, @Tissoni-CallimacheaGregoriodi-1997.

[^62]:	@Hollis-Callimachuslightlater-2002

[^63]:	@Simelidis-SelectedPoemsGregory-2009 30–46

[^64]:	@Prudhomme-oeuvrepoetiqueGregoire-2006 143, 180

[^65]:	For example, @Consolino-Sofiisamfoterisprytanin-1987 @Vertoudakis-OGDOOVIVLIOTIS-2011.

[^66]:	Though several scholars continue to maintain Gregory’s authorship of the *Christus patiens* (*e.g.* @tuillierpassion1969, @salanitrogregorio2003, @centanniil2007), I regard it as almost impossible that Gregory would produce a text with such haphazard attention to classical prosody, even granting that he does not always follow classical quantities. For rejections of Gregorian authorship, see @mostauthorship2008 and @horanderlexikalische1988.